.TH INCUDINE 1 "January 2023" "" ""
.SH NAME
incudine - Music/DSP programming environment for Common Lisp.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBincudine\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE1\fR [\fIFILE2\fR ...]]
         [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE1\fR [\fIFILE2\fR ...]] ...
         [\fIUSER-OPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Standalone executable for Incudine, a Music/DSP programming
environment for Common Lisp.

Incudine is useful to design software synthesizers or sound plugins
from scratch, exploiting the expressive power of Common Lisp, without
the constraint to use pre-built unit generators. It is also a
compositional tool that allows to produce high quality sounds
controllable at the sample level, defining and redefining the digital
signal processors and the musical structures on-the-fly.

Incudine introduces the Virtual UGen (VUG), a new mechanism for
defining primitive unit generators by writing concise and reusable
code. The definition of a VUG contains lisp code and/or other nested
VUGs (or "real" UGens), and it is re-arranged and compiled efficiently
during the creation of a DSP.

Incudine works with SBCL, an implementation of ANSI Common Lisp with a
high-performance native compiler.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-sndfile\-buffer\-size\fR <\fIint\fR>
Buffer size to read/write a soundfile.
.TP
\fB\-B\fR, \fB\-\-block\-size\fR <\fIframes\fR>
Block size for block\-by\-block processing.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-channels\fR <\fIint\fR>
Number of the output channels.
.TP
\fB\-\-client\-name\fR <\fIname\fR>
Name of the client for the audio server.
.TP
\fB\-\-compile\-score\-contents\fR
Compile the contents of the score.
.TP
\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-data\-format\fR <\fItype\fR>
Format of the sample for the output file.
.TP
\fB\-\-data\-format\-list\fR
Available audio formats.
.TP
\fB\-\-default\-table\-size\fR <\fIint\fR>
Default size of a table for an oscillator.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-duration\fR <\fIseconds\fR>
Duration of the output file.
.TP
\fB\-\-debug\fR
Print debug info.
.TP
\fB\-\-disk\-guard\-size\fR <\fIseconds\fR>
Size of the output file with undefined duration.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print a summary of the available options on the standard output.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-header\-type\fR <\fItype\fR>
Type of the header for the output file.
.TP
\fB\-\-header\-type\-list\fR
Available header types.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-infile\fR <\fIfilename\fR>
Sound input filename or `\-' for standard input.
.TP
\fB\-\-input\-channels\fR <\fIint\fR>
Number of the input channels.
.TP
\fB\-\-interpret\-score\-contents\fR
Interpret the contents of the score (default).
.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-logfile\fR <\fIfilename\fR>
Logging file.
.TP
\fB\-\-lisp\-version\fR
Print version information of SBCL and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-logtime\fR (\fBsec\fR|\fBsamp\fR)
Log message with time in seconds or in samples.
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-number\-of\-channels\fR <\fIint\fR>
Max number of the channels.
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-number\-of\-nodes\fR <\fIint\fR>
Max number of the nodes.
.TP
\fB\-N\fR, \fB\-\-no\-realtime\fR
Stop realtime.
.TP
\fB\-\-nrt\-edf\-heap\-size\fR <\fIint\fR>
Max number of the events in non realtime.
.TP
\fB\-\-nrt\-pool\-size\fR <\fIbytes\fR>
Size of the pool for temporary C malloc in nrt.
.TP
\fB\-\-nrt\-priority\fR <\fIint\fR>
Priority of the non\-realtime thread.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-outfile\fR <\fIfilename\fR>
Sound output filename or `\-' for standard output.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-period\fR <\fIint\fR>
Frames per buffer (used only with PortAudio).
.TP
\fB\-\-pad\fR <\fIseconds\fR>
Extend the duration of the output file.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-rate\fR <\fIint\fR>
Sample rate.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-realtime\fR
Start realtime.
.TP
\fB\-\-receiver\-priority\fR <\fIint\fR>
Priority of the thread for a receiver.
.TP
\fB\-\-rt\-edf\-heap\-size\fR <\fIint\fR>
Heap size for realtime scheduling.
.TP
\fB\-\-rt\-pool\-size\fR <\fIbytes\fR>
Size of the pool for the C heap used in realtime.
.TP
\fB\-\-rt\-priority\fR <\fIint\fR>
Priority of the realtime thread.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR <\fIfilename\fR>
Process a score file or `\-' for standard input.

In non-realtime, without the option \fB\-o\fR or \fB\-\-outfile\fR, the
name of the produced sound file is derived from the name of the score file
(if standard input, the output will be sent to standard output).
.TP
\fB\-\-sample\-pool\-size\fR <\fIbytes\fR>
Size of the pool for the C arrays defined in DSP!
.TP
\fB\-\-score\-args\fR <\fIlist\fR>
Score function arguments.
.TP
\fB\-\-sound\-velocity\fR <\fIreal\fR>
Velocity of the sound at 22°C, 1 atmosfera.
.TP
\fB\-\-swank\-server\fR <\fIport\fR>
Start Swank server.
.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-tempo\fR <\fIbpm\fR>
Initial tempo in beats per minute.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
More verbose.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Print version information and exit.
.SS Metadata
.HP
\fB\-\-title\fR <\fItitle\fR>
.HP
\fB\-\-copyright\fR <\fIcopyright\fR>
.HP
\fB\-\-software\fR <\fIsoftware\fR>
.HP
\fB\-\-artist\fR <\fIartist\fR>
.HP
\fB\-\-comment\fR <\fIcomment\fR>
.HP
\fB\-\-date\fR <\fIdate\fR>
.HP
\fB\-\-album\fR <\fIalbum\fR>
.HP
\fB\-\-license\fR <\fIlicense\fR>
.HP
\fB\-\-tracknumber\fR <\fItrack\fR>
.HP
\fB\-\-genre\fR <\fIgenre\fR>
.SS SBCL options
.TP
\fB\-\-sysinit\fR <\fIfilename\fR>
System\-wide init\-file to use instead of default.
.TP
\fB\-\-userinit\fR <\fIfilename\fR>
Per\-user init\-file to use instead of default.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-sysinit\fR
Inhibit processing of any system\-wide init\-file.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-userinit\fR
Inhibit processing of any per\-user init\-file.
.TP
\fB\-\-disable\-debugger\fR
Invoke sb\-ext:disable\-debugger.
.TP
\fB\-\-noinform\fR
Suppress the printing of the banner at startup.
.TP
\fB\-\-noprint\fR
Run a Read\-Eval Loop without printing results.
.TP
\fB\-\-script\fR [<\fIfilename\fR>]
Skip #! line, disable debugger, avoid verbosity.
.TP
\fB\-\-quit\fR
Exit with code 0 after option processing.
.TP
\fB\-\-non\-interactive\fR
Sets both \fB\-\-quit\fR and \fB\-\-disable\-debugger\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-eval\fR <\fIform\fR>
Form to eval when processing this option.
.TP
\fB\-\-load\fR <\fIfilename\fR>
File to load when processing this option.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
cat >foo.cudo <<'---'
(dsp! simple (freq db (env envelope) gate)
  (stereo (* (envelope env gate 1 #'free)
             (sine freq (db->linear db) 0))))
---

cat >quux.rego <<'---'
with (env1 (or (first score-args) (make-adsr .1 .09 .9 .5)))

0   simple  440  -14  env1  1
0   simple  220  -20  env1  1
0.5 simple  225  -26  env1  1
1   simple  448  -14  env1  1
3   simple  450  -20  (make-adsr 1 .2 .7 1 :curve :sin)  1
5   set-control 0 :gate 0
---

incudine foo.cudo -v -s quux.rego

incudine foo.cudo --pad 1.2 -s quux.rego

incudine foo.cudo --score-args "(list (make-perc .01 3))" \\
                  --pad 1.2 -s quux.rego

incudine foo.cudo -o "battimenti zincati.wav" -s quux.rego

echo '0 simple 1000 -6 (make-perc .1 1.5) 1' \\
     | incudine foo.cudo -d 2 -s - > rego-from-stdin-1.wav

cat quux.rego | incudine foo.cudo -o rego-from-stdin-2.wav -s -

incudine foo.cudo --pad 1.2 -o - -H ircam -F float \\
         -s quux.rego | sox - quux.wv

incudine foo.cudo -d 6.5 -s quux.rego

incudine foo.cudo --pad 1.2 -H flac -s quux.rego

incudine foo.cudo --pad 1.2 -H ogg -F vorbis -s quux.rego

incudine foo.cudo --pad 1.2 --title "Passame n'elettrodo" \\
         --artist "Fabro Cadabro Band" -s quux.rego

.SH FILES
~/.incudinerc is the configuration file.
.SH SEE ALSO
Tutorials in HTML and text formats in incudine/doc/ directory.

Incudine home page at http://incudine.sourceforge.net
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at incudine-devel@lists.sourceforge.net
.SH AUTHORS
Incudine was written by Tito Latini.
